The original doCallback function
is the change from a star to a
caret in the parameter prototype.
The invocation of the
block looks the same,
but the big difference is that
when we invoke the callback,
we don't actually have to have a
separately defined function elsewhere.
We can just put the block of code
directly in line in our doCallback call.
So queues are a concept in
Grand Central Dispatch that are
basically a very fundamental
[Transcript missing]
Once the work has been
submitted to a queue,
the work is run one at a time
for that queue in FIFO order.
So the queue is basically a serialization
mechanism all of its own for
serializing work that's submitted to it.
Here's an example where we
have a couple of work blocks,
and they might be on two threads
running at the same time.
Both get submitted to the same queue,
and the queue will take the
first one that's submitted to it,
execute that work block.
When it's done,
it'll execute the second work block.
To speak of how this
can help with MultiCore,
well,
if you have multiple queues that are
each working on work independently,
those queues can have their work
scheduled on different CPUs.
So here we have an example of a queue
that might be working on a work block,
and if work gets submitted
to the second queue,
we can start working on that as well
on a different CPU on the machine.
Why would you want to use
queues instead of Pthreads?
Well, aside from the challenge of knowing
how many Pthreads to create,
it should also be noted that queues
are much more efficient than Pthreads.
They're a simple data structure
on the order of about 256 bytes,
whereas a Pthread with its stack
and all of its kernel resources,
you know, might be well over half a
megabyte of information.
and Grand Central Dispatch manages
a pool of threads that execute the
work that are submitted to queues.
The queues themselves are not
bound to any specific thread.
They will be executing on
any thread that's available
to this pool that's managed.
However, again,
a queue will only execute one work
block at a time for that queue.
So you'll never switch threads
in the middle of a work block,
but between work blocks that
are executed on a queue,
the underlying thread might change.
In this way,
we can scale the threads dynamically with
the number of CPUs that are available
based on queues from the kernel and
the kernel scheduler and the activity
that's happening both in the hardware and
with other applications on the system.
So as a design pattern,
what we'd recommend is that
queues are used for distinct
subsystems of your code.
And this allows the different
subsystems in your application to
potentially execute concurrently,
but the access to the data inside
of a subsystem you don't need
to take locks on because of the
serialization nature of the queue.
Any updates to the state of that
subsystem are implicitly serialized,
so you don't need to incur
the expense of locks.
And one way to look at this is
each queue becomes an island of
serialization in a sea of concurrency.
So here's some sample
code of creating a queue.
Up at the top here,
we're creating some context data that
we're going to associate with our queue.
This is the context data that the
queue is going to serialize access to.
You can see the first argument
to dispatch queue new is a label.
We've given you the ability
to attach labels to queues.
This helps in debugging to see what
queue is supposed to serve what purpose.
And we're informally recommending
the reverse DNS style naming for
queues so that as you create queues
and frameworks create queues,
we can keep them all apart.
There's a block as the third
argument to the new queue function,
which is a deletion callback.
So when the queue is deleted,
this gets invoked,
and this basically lets us
free our context data that's
associated with the queue.
And then we pass in the
context data itself.
I should note that blocks
do have all of the outer
variables in scope in the block.
So yes, it's okay for that block
to free context data,
and it really does see that pointer
that's from the calling function.
Further down on the slide,
you can see we have a dispatch call wait.
That's one of our very primitive calls.
It simply enqueues a block
for execution on that queue.
And so you could imagine that there
might be multiple threads that all
want to print this context data.
Perhaps there's, you know, some,
computation that needs to be done.
Things need to stay synchronized
in the context data to generate
the representation to be printed.
So this would keep things serialized.
It would make sure that no two
threads are trying to print the
context data at the same time.
And then finally,
we have an example of deleting
a queue via DispatchQueueDelete.
And once the queue is deleted,
it will fire that block
that will free our context.
So a higher-level concept
than DispatchCallWait is
something called DispatchCall,
and that operates using items.
And items are essentially handles
to a block that's outstanding.
But it's more than that.
It's not just the block
that needs to be run.
It's also a completion block that
will be run when the first work
block has completed to let you
know that the work has finished.
And then context data can also
be associated with an item.
And the use of item allows for
synchronization between multiple queues.
The same item handle that's created
when you make a DispatchCall will
be passed to the work function,
and again it will be passed to
the completion callback so you
can correlate the two events.
Another interesting aspect
of items is that in our API,
there's a uniform mechanism
for canceling them.
The cancellations advisory,
which means that the work blocks and
the completion blocks need to test if
it's been canceled and voluntarily exit
early if the item has been canceled.
And we do this for memory
management reasons,
which I will discuss in more depth later.
But the work block and the
completion block are always called,
and this gives your application the
ability to clean up any context data
that are associated with the work.
So here's a little animation of a
queue using DispatchCall to submit
some work to another queue and
then receiving a completion block.
So here on the left we have a queue
which is working on a work block.
That in turn is making a DispatchCall to
call out to a second queue.
The second queue will
execute its work block,
and when that finishes,
a completion block will be
submitted back to the first
queue that initiated the work,
letting it know that its
work is now complete.
And here's some sample code
for using DispatchCall.
DispatchCall is called with the
queue as the first argument.
We have a work block,
which this is going to iterate
over an array and perform some
potentially expensive operation.
So maybe we want to do
this in the background.
We don't want to do
it on the main thread,
because that'll block the
UI from processing events.
We can submit it to
this background queue.
And then once the array
has been processed,
we'll get the completion callback.
We can make a note in our structures
that the array has been processed,
and then the UI can update appropriately.
And the last argument in the
call you can see is the item.
That is the item handle that refers
to this asynchronous operation.
It's the same item that's passed
into the work block and is
passed into the completion block.
This is an example of the same code which
is testing for cancellation as it should.
So there's an API,
DispatchItemTestCancel,
which we will be testing for in
each iteration of our expensive
operation on the array.
And if at any time we see that
the work has been canceled,
we simply break out of the for loop.
We don't need to continue processing it.
You know,
the user has hit the cancel button
or done something else to indicate
that they don't care about the
results of this operation anymore.
And then in the completion callback,
we again test for cancellation to
see if we really should honor the
results of this computation or not.
But you might ask yourself,
what if each of these indexes on the
array can be processed independently?
Maybe there's no
correlation between the two,
and we have a lot of CPUs.
Is there anything we can do to
get more multi-core efficiency?
Well, we have a concept called subtasks
that allow your applications to break
the work up into multiple subtasks.
And the subtasks may run
concurrently on available CPUs.
Of course, they're not guaranteed
to run concurrently.
They just may run concurrently.
And that, of course,
depends on how many CPUs are actually
available to perform the work.
And that might change during the
course of the computation itself.
So subtasks can be thought
of as a group of work blocks.
We actually represent all of the
subtasks by a single item handle,
and cancellation applies
to the group as a whole.
So you can kick off a bunch of subtasks,
have them all run,
cancel them all as a group.
Completion is also done as a group.
So basically the completion
block will fire once all of
the subtasks have completed.
We have two APIs for
working with subtasks.
DispatchSubtasks takes an array of
blocks and it will run all of the
blocks in the array as a subtask
concurrently with the current work block
and anything else on the current queue.
And you will get the completion callback
when all of those blocks have terminated.
And DispatchApply is a similar
API which only takes one work block,
but it takes a range,
a numeric range that should be applied.
And so this is where you might have
the same operation that you want to
apply to multiple things in an array.
So to illustrate how subtasks
allow concurrent execution,
here we have a queue
that's running on one core.
It's executing a work block.
That work block might
kick off four subtasks.
So the first two start
executing on a couple of CPUs.
The third and the fourth start
executing once the first two are done.
And then when all have completed,
the completion block gets enqueued
back on the original queue.
Here's that same example of performing
an expensive operation on an array,
but this time it's using
DispatchApply instead of using
a for loop in the work block.
It looks very similar,
but instead of a for loop,
we are getting our index from an
API called DispatchItemGetIndex,
and this tells us which index
of the apply operation the work
block is currently operating on.
Again, we test for cancellation to see
if the operation's been canceled.
We perform the expensive operation.
There's a new argument in
the middle here called count,
and this tells us how many times we
need to iterate over the work block.
And then, of course,
once all iterations are complete,
the completion callback is returned,
and that looks the same as it
did in the previous example.
Here's an alternate example
using the Dispatch subtasks,
where maybe you don't have the same work
that you want to perform multiple times,
but you actually have discrete
units of work that need to
be performed in parallel,
or may be performed in parallel.
So here we have an example
of a Sudoku puzzle,
where we are validating whether
a number is a legitimate
choice in a particular square.
And of course,
the constraints on Sudoku are that the
number may not reappear in the same row,
the same column, or the same 3x3 grid.
And so we can test each of
these constraints independently,
and each block is colored
corresponding to the region of
the puzzle which it's testing.
And the API call we use
is DispatchSubtasksWait,
so it runs all three of these
subtasks potentially at the same time,
and then continues running 1x1.
once all three have completed.
The final concept of
Grand Central Dispatch is that of events.
We've added a lot of support for tying
in core kernel types into an event loop
that can be managed by your queues.
And so we have sources of work for
queues that can be automatically
generated based on timers,
signals, file descriptors, pipes,
processes, Mach messages,
all sorts of core kernel types.
And these sources are
bound to a specific queue,
so every time an event fires
on that core kernel type,
a work block will automatically
be submitted to your queue.
And here's a sample code.
We have a timer which is going to print
ping to standard output every second.
So we're creating a new timer,
running it once a second on an interval,
and it's just simply printing ping.
We have some more sample code here,
which is a simple implementation
of the cat command in Unix,
and that simply echoes standard
input back out to standard output.
So you can see we're creating
a new event source on the
standard input file descriptor.
We're reading data from
that file descriptor when we
get this work block called,
and it indicates data as readable.
If we got data from the file descriptor,
we'll go ahead and write it back
out again to standard output.
Otherwise,
we'll test for an error condition
or test for the end of the
file and exit appropriately.
And so we hope that providing some
of these event delivery mechanisms
will help tie Grand Central Dispatch
into other aspects of your
application more naturally.
Now on to some of the advanced
topics of Grand Central Dispatch.
And these are suspending and
resuming queues and event sources,
how Grand Central Dispatch
deals with preemption,
some techniques for memory management,
how deletion is handled and just
resource deallocation in general,
ways to use queues for
synchronization in your applications,
how Grand Central Dispatch is integrated
with the frameworks on the system,
and a final note on how to properly
abstract the use of dispatch queues.
So suspend and resume.
Queues and event sources
may be suspended or resumed.
The suspend and resume
is reference counted,
and basically any time this
reference count is greater than zero,
it's considered to be suspended.
Suspension, like cancellation,
does not interrupt anything
that's currently running.
It's just some internal state
that's tracked in our objects.
However, once the current work block
has finished executing,
no new work blocks will be run
from that queue if it's suspended,
and no further work blocks
will be delivered from an
event source if it's suspended.
But when either one of them is resumed,
anything that had been pent
up will be sent through.
For event sources,
it's also important to note that
some of the events may be coalesced.
So if a file descriptor is
readable and you suspend it,
you're not going to get
a flood of callbacks.
When it's resumed,
you'll probably only get one callback
indicating that there is data to
be read on the file descriptor.
Grand Central Dispatch is designed
to work well with preemption.
Queues use a weight-free algorithm.
Submitting work to queues
does not need locking.
And so they are preemption-friendly.
The kernel can preempt threads that
are submitting work to a queue.
However, the queues themselves never
preempt the work that's running.
The work is always run one
at a time in FIFO order.
The work blocks are always executed,
and the completion blocks
are always executed.
So you do have the guarantee that
you will see that block fire.
You will be able to manage your memory.
and queues are not reentrant in any way.
Again, that's just consistent with
the one-at-a-time philosophy.
So memory management is
a very important subject.
Dispatch call is asynchronous,
and a lot of other of the API calls in
Grand Central Dispatch are asynchronous.
And so it's important not to reference
the local stack in the blocks.
If you're using integers or
floats or other small instance
variables or stack variables,
those will get copied into the block.
Dispatch call will retain
the blocks as necessary and
release them when it's done.
But you don't want to do something
like refer to a large structure that's
on the local stack that might get
freed before the dispatched block
actually gets around to executing.
So we advise the use of Dispatch Call in
a way where the context data that goes
along with the Dispatch Call is copied
specifically for that Dispatch Call,
or the ownership is just completely
handed over to that Dispatch Call.
And then the copy is freed,
or the ownership means
the original is freed,
whenever the completion callback fires.
And that is why we always run the
work blocks and the completion blocks.
Deletion is also fairly interesting
in Grand Central Dispatch
because it's very asynchronous.
When you delete a queue,
it doesn't actually free
the memory right there.
It waits for any outstanding
callbacks that may need to come back
to that queue to have completed.
and the deletion block will only
run after all of the outstanding
work that's currently enqueued on
the queue and all of the outstanding
completion callbacks have returned.
At that point,
the deletion block is a good opportunity
to free the context data because nothing
else is going to be accessing it.
And the handle to the dispatch
queue will be invalid at the point
that the deletion block returns.
So the deletion block is your
application's notice that
that queue is going away.
It should not refer to that
same queue at any point after
the deletion block has fired.
Event sources will automatically be
deleted whenever a queue is deleted.
And the reason for this is that the event
sources are bound to a specific queue.
That's the only place
their work blocks will go.
So if the queue gets deleted,
there's really no point trying
to generate any work blocks
for those events anymore.
And there's also an optional flag
you can pass to DispatchQueueDelete,
which will implicitly set
the cancel bit on any work
that's remaining on the queue.
So there might be a bunch of work
that's already waiting on the queue.
You decide you don't
want to do any of it.
You want to delete the queue.
Passing this flag means that as
each of those work blocks are run,
whether or not the individual
items are canceled,
the queue itself will just mark that
cancellation bit on each of the items.
So the work blocks will test for that.
They'll exit early,
and it lets you delete the queue
as quickly as possible while
still fulfilling the guarantee
that everything will be run.
A note on synchronization
is that we recommend the use
of queues instead of locks.
You can run blocks using DispatchCall to
implement critical sections in your code.
And this guarantees mutually
exclusive access to the resources
that you want to protect.
So there's really no need to
use mutexes or spinlocks when
you can use the DispatchQueues.
And this has a few advantages.
One is the weight-free algorithm
of DispatchQueues does scale
better with multiple CPUs.
You are wasting fewer resources
trying to acquire a lock.
And as programs evolve,
we've typically noticed that critical
sections tend to get bigger and bigger.
So even if it seemed really cheap
to acquire a lock and there wasn't
much contention to begin with,
usually more code gets added,
different functions and different
subsystems start doing more work,
those locks get held for
increasing periods of time,
the chance of contention increases,
and the performance goes down
as the number of CPUs scale.
So our weight-free queuing
algorithm really helps address that.
And it's also important to note
that the proper use of a dispatch
queue and that proper use is to
always specify a completion block.
Don't use the weight variance,
but actually use the
fully asynchronous APIs.
That will avoid deadlock
because you're scheduling all
of your work at that point.
The system will always be able to
make forward progress executing work
that has been submitted to the queues,
and you've eliminated the
potential for deadlock,
which is one of the more common obstacles
of using locks with a bunch of threads.
So here's a very simple example of some
sample code where we're using dispatch
call to implement a critical section.
This is an example you may have
seen in a CS class a long time ago,
where you have an account
balance at a bank,
you make a deposit,
and somebody else might be
trying to make a withdrawal,
and you don't want to end up in
some weird intermediate state.
You want each of the transactions
to operate in completion
and one before the other,
hopefully the deposit
before the withdrawal.
And so we can see here that we're making
a dispatch call at the top of the slide.
There is a work block.
It's implementing the critical section
by being submitted to the queue,
and it adds a deposit to the
balance of the bank account.
The bottom half of the slide
is an example of a withdrawal.
We are subtracting the
amount from the balance,
determining whether there were
sufficient funds in the account.
If not, we're using a trick of actually
canceling the item itself
from within its work block.
And this is a fairly effective way to
see whether an item succeeded or not.
It's also very useful for subtasks.
If maybe one branch of many subtasks
decide the operation wasn't worthwhile,
it can cancel itself.
And that actually takes out all of
the other subtasks at the same time.
Otherwise,
if there were sufficient funds,
we subtract the amount
from the account balance.
So you may be curious about how
Grand Central Dispatch is integrated
with the other frameworks on the system.
We do plan to have integration
with the CFRunLoop and NSRunLoop.
I'll speak to that,
the current state of the integration,
in a minute.
But the ultimate plan is
that they will be integrated,
so all the completion callbacks that
come back to the main thread will
be delivered to the current RunLoop.
So in other words,
if you're running a thread in
a CFRunLoop or an NSRunLoop
and you use a dispatch call,
the completion callback
will automatically be
scheduled with your RunLoop.
NSOperation is being worked
on to provide a higher-level
abstraction for Dispatch Queues,
but it will be using Dispatch
Queues as its underlying mechanism,
so they'll be fully consistent there.
There are some important
considerations which are fully
documented in the headers.
I'll point to the headers
a little bit later.
About POSIX threads compatibility.
As I mentioned earlier in the talk,
a queue is free to run work on any thread
that's managed by Grand Central Dispatch,
and that thread may change between the
invocations of work blocks on a queue.
So there are a lot of things that
continue to work as they always have,
but there are certain things
you should be aware of.
In particular,
some of the Pthread get and
set specific data won't work.
If you've changed which
thread you're working on,
you might not find certain
values that you've cached away.
So you really shouldn't be manipulating
threads that you didn't create.
Calling Pthread exit, for example,
would be a particularly rude thing
to do from within a work block.
And so one good rule of thumb
is to not use Pthread exit.
The other one is to take nothing
but pictures and leave nothing
but footprints when working
in work blocks with Dispatch.
And finally,
it should be noted that if a dispatch
call is made from a context that's
completely outside of any dispatch queue,
the completion callback will get invoked.
We'll route that back to
the main thread's RunLoop.
And so if you're using a
RunLoop in your application,
you can handle all of
these completion blocks.
If you don't use a RunLoop
in your application,
there is a DispatchMain API call that
can be used as a low-level POSIX RunLoop.
So a final note on abstraction and
queues as an implementation detail.
That's exactly what we
view these queues as,
an implementation detail of your
applications and our frameworks.
We're going to try not to expose
the queues directly as arguments
in our higher-level API,
but they'll be used internally for
thread-safe classes to protect the access
to instance variables in the objects,
for example,
or to coalesce work that might be
coming in for multiple threads but
needs to be performed on a single
thread by a particular subsystem.
And so in your own frameworks
and your own classes,
we recommend you do the same,
to use the queues as an
internal implementation detail
to achieve thread safety,
but not necessarily be
passing queues everywhere,
because once you start passing
queues between different subsystems,
they have to start having knowledge
about what the context data that's
associated with the queue is,
what blocks are safe to
execute on that queue,
and it starts getting more
difficult to maintain.
So a final note is that
Grand Central Dispatch
is a work in progress.
There are certain things that you may
have seen in the presentations this week
that aren't on the developer seat yet.
We're working on things like a D-trace
static probe provider and a dispatch
instrument to help analyze code
that's using Grand Central Dispatch
and aid with debugging.
These aren't in the seat yet.
There was a demonstration of
the technology earlier today in
getting started with instruments.
There's also a known issue,
and that is the integration
with CFRunLoop and NSRunLoop is
not in the Snow Leopard seed.
However,
that hopefully will be coming soon.
So now on to some demonstrations
of the technology.
The first demonstration
I have is a Sudoku solver.
And we're using a brute
force algorithm that-- oops,
can we go back to the slide for a second?
We're using a brute force algorithm,
and this is essentially iterating
through the puzzle linearly,
trying possible values for each of
the squares and backtracking if it
ever gets itself into a situation
that it can't solve the puzzle from.
We'll use the subtasks API to break
the puzzle up into multiple copies,
pin another initial variable down so
we have a smaller puzzle to solve,
run all of these smaller
puzzles in parallel,
and if any one of them finds
the solution that's valid,
it will cancel its own work item,
which stops the computation
of all the other threads.
And that means that once
the subtasks have returned,
either a solution has been found
or no solution has been found.
So now, if we go to the demo machine,
Is that large enough?
So we have a worst-case puzzle here.
The one on the left-hand side
is going to be solved serially
using the brute force algorithm.
The one on the right-hand side
is going to be solved in parallel
using the same algorithm,
but with a smaller search space.
And one of the reasons this is
a worst-case puzzle is because
the top row is all blank,
which means it's going to need
to do a lot of backtracking
to fill in the values there.
And we actually know the
solution is at the top row,
987654321.
So it really has to backtrack
a lot to get that first square
up to the value of nine.
And so we will start.
And you can see the parallel version
found the answer in about a second.
[Transcript missing]
So our second demonstration
is a simple web server.
This is actually available as
sample code that's associated
with the session on the website.
The architecture of this server is to use
a dispatch queue for each HTTP connection
that's initiated on the server.
HTTP connection really is a conversation
between the client and the server that
needs to happen in a specific order.
There's not much opportunity
for concurrency there,
but obviously if there are multiple
connections at the same time,
there's a lot of
opportunity for concurrency.
The web server is also a great
example of using the events API.
All of the I/O in the web server
is non-blocking and asynchronous,
including reading the files
off of the local disk.
And another great example
of the web server is that it
uses queues for serialization.
So we don't need to lock
when logging to our log file.
We can just use dispatch call to
send a message to our logging queue,
and that will append all the log
messages to the file in the right order.
So looking at the demo machine.
I already have the web server running,
but I'll pull up Safari,
and you can see it loaded a
bunch of images from the Sierras.
And each of these thumbnails
is actually the full big image.
And Safari is actually
what's scaling it down.
So we can bring up Top.
And this process right here
is the Dispatch web server.
You can see this is
an eight-core Mac Pro.
It's actually scaled up
to using nine threads.
It has the main thread and
the eight Dispatch threads.
And it's not a great example
of using a lot of CPU because
it's actually all non-blocking.
So as we refresh this,
the CPU actually stays relatively low.
But it is a good example of
design patterns that you want
to use with dispatch queues.
And if we can go back to the slides,
please.
Our final example is an interesting
example of a variation of
Conway's Game of Life that
is completely asynchronous.
If you're familiar with
Conway's Game of Life,
you'll recall that it's a grid of cells,
cellular automata,
and the cells become alive
if they have two or three
neighboring cells that are alive,
and the cells die if they
have less than two neighboring
cells because they're lonely,
or if they have greater than
three neighboring cells because
there's population overcrowding.
However, we have a quite unconventional
implementation of this.
We're actually creating one
queue per cell in the simulation.
And each cell will use dispatch call
to contact neighboring cells to ask
them whether they're alive or not.
And as the completion callback will
indicate whether or not it's alive.
So all of the queries are
performed asynchronously.
There's no locking that needs
to be done to look at the
state of the neighboring cells.
Once all the results
have been accumulated,
the cell decides whether
it needs to change its own
state according to the rules.
And if it does have a state change,
it'll broadcast yet another
message out to all the neighboring
cells to indicate that the state
needs to change in those cells,
or potentially needs to
change in those cells,
and then they'll start
up their own queries,
and the whole process
just kind of cascades.
So here's a little animation.
I have a simple 3x3 grid.
There are three dark squares
which are considered to be living.
There are other white squares
which are considered to not
have anything in them at all.
The center square will be
checking out its surroundings,
so it sends a dispatch call
to the queue that represents
each of the neighboring cells.
Those, in turn,
will all reply with either a 1 or a 0,
indicating that they're alive or not.
In this case,
there are three living neighboring cells,
and so there will be a state change
for this middle cell to be alive.
So if we can go to the demo machine,
please.
So here we have each of these squares
is represented by a dispatch queue.
There's over 12,000
dispatch queues right here.
We can pull up the processor palette
to see how busy this Mac Pro is.
Pretty busy.
Because Grand Central Dispatch adjusts
to the number of available CPUs,
we can actually start turning off CPUs.
And you'll see the simulation
start to slow down.
You'll also see more gray
appear on the screen.
Gray is all of the cells that
are in an intermediate state.
They've received a notification
that they should change,
but they haven't heard back
from all of their neighbors yet.
And you can see the work is building up.
We have a backlog of work to do.
There's a lot of cells
that need processing.
And then as we re-enable the CPUs,
will start to catch up
with the simulation more.
A lot of those gray regions
will start to vanish.
So this is a great example of how
dynamic Grand Central Dispatch is in
dispatching work to available CPUs.
So back to the slides, please.
So to get more information
about Grand Central Dispatch,
there are header files in
the Snow Leopard preview.
They're at userinclude-dispatch.h
and userinclude-dispatch-events.h.
Dispatch.h is what we're
calling the core API.
It has queues and dispatch
call and subtasks,
and then events are where you
can monitor for activity on any
of the core kernel event types.
There's also HeaderDoc HTML documentation
that's available on the WWDC site
associated with this session.
You do need to log in to the attendee
site to get that information.
And we've also set up a mailing list,
or actually not a mailing list,
but just a dropbox for mail.
You can send feedback to
gcd-feedback at group.apple.com.
It's not a mailing list.
You can't subscribe to it because
this is still pre-release technology.
We're not going to discuss
it in a public forum.
But if you have questions
or comments or feedback,
feel free to send an email there,
and we will read it.
Value of nine.
And so we will start.
Thank you.
And you can see the parallel version
found the answer in about a second.
Whereas it took the serial
version 5.5 seconds.
The great thing about this is if
you reduce the number of CPUs,
it actually runs in about the same amount
of time as the serial version because
it's doing the same amount of work
that it would need to have done anyway.
It's just that by executing
them more than one at a time,
you can find the solution faster.
All right, go back to the slides, please.
So our second demonstration
is a simple web server.
This is actually available as
sample code that's associated
with the session on the website.
The architecture of this server is to use
a dispatch queue for each HTTP connection
that's initiated on the server.
HTTP connection really is a conversation
between the client and the server that
needs to happen in a specific order.
There's not much opportunity
for concurrency there,
but obviously if there are multiple
connections at the same time,
there's a lot of
opportunity for concurrency.
The web server is also a great
example of using the events API.
All of the I/O in the web server
is non-blocking and asynchronous,
including reading the files
off of the local disk.
And another great example
of the web server is that it
uses queues for serialization.
So we don't need to lock
when logging to our log file.
We can just use dispatch call to
send a message to our logging queue,
and that will append all the log
messages to the file in the right order.
So looking at the demo machine.
I already have the web server running,
but I'll pull up Safari,
and you can see it loaded a
bunch of images from the Sierras.
And each of these thumbnails
is actually the full big image.
And Safari is actually
what's scaling it down.
So we can bring up Top.
And this process right here
is the Dispatch web server.
You can see this is
an eight-core Mac Pro.
It's actually scaled up
to using nine threads.
It has the main thread and
the eight Dispatch threads.
And it's not a great example
of using a lot of CPU because
it's actually all non-blocking.
So as we refresh this,
the CPU actually stays relatively low.
But it is a good example of
design patterns that you want
to use with dispatch queues.
Our final example is a variation
of Conway's Game of Life that
is completely asynchronous.
If you're familiar with
Conway's Game of Life,
you'll recall that it's a grid of cells,
cellular automata,
and the cells become alive
if they have two or three
neighboring cells that are alive,
and the cells die if they
have less than two neighboring
cells because they're lonely,
or if they have greater than
three neighboring cells because
there's population overcrowding.
However, we have a quite unconventional
implementation of this.
We're actually creating one
queue per cell in the simulation.
And each cell will use dispatch call
to contact neighboring cells to ask
them whether they're alive or not.
And as the completion callback will
indicate whether or not it's alive.
So all of the queries are
performed asynchronously.
There's no locking that needs
to be done to look at the
state of the neighboring cells.
Once all the results
have been accumulated,
the cell decides whether
it needs to change its own
state according to the rules.
And if it does have a state change,
it'll broadcast yet another
message out to all the neighboring
cells to indicate that the state
needs to change in those cells,
or potentially needs to
change in those cells.
And then they'll start
up their own queries,
and the whole process
just kind of cascades.
So here's a little animation.
I have a simple three-by-three grid.
There are three dark squares,
which are considered to be living.
There are other white squares,
which are considered to not
have anything in them at all.
The center square will be
checking out its surroundings.
So it sends a dispatch call
to the queue that represents
each of the neighboring cells.
Those, in turn,
will all reply with either a 1 or a 0,
indicating that they're alive or not.
In this case,
there are three living neighboring cells,
and so there will be a state change
for this middle cell to be alive.
So if we can go to the demo machine,
please.
So here we have each of these squares
is represented by a dispatch queue.
There's over 12,000
dispatch queues right here.
We can pull up the processor palette
to see how busy this Mac Pro is.
Pretty busy.
Because Grand Central Dispatch adjusts
to the number of available CPUs,
we can actually start turning off CPUs.
And you'll see the simulation
start to slow down.
You'll also see more gray
appear on the screen.
Gray is all of the cells that
are in an intermediate state.
They've received a notification
that they should change,
but they haven't heard back
from all of their neighbors yet.
And you can see the work is building up.
We have a backlog of work to do.
There's a lot of cells
that need processing.
And then as we re-enable the CPUs,
will start to catch up
with the simulation more.
A lot of those gray regions
will start to vanish.
So this is a great example of how
dynamic Grand Central Dispatch is in
dispatching work to available CPUs.
So to get more information
about Grand Central Dispatch,
there are header files in
the Snow Leopard preview.
User include dispatch.h and
user include dispatch events.h.
Dispatch.h is what we're
calling the core API.
It has queues and dispatch
call and subtasks,
and then events are where you
can monitor for activity on any
of the core kernel event types.
There's also HeaderDoc HTML documentation
that's available on the WWDC site
associated with this session.
You do need to log into the attendee
site to get that information.
And we've also set up a mailing list,
or actually not a mailing list,
but just a dropbox for mail.
You can send feedback to
gcd-feedback at group.apple.com.
It's not a mailing list.
You can't subscribe to it because
this is still pre-release technology.
We're not going to discuss
it in a public forum.
But if you have questions
or comments or feedback,
feel free to send an email there,
and we will read it.